InterNational Committee for Information Technology Standards (INCITS)
Secretariat: Information Technology Industry Council (ITI)
700 K Street NW, Suite 600, Washington, DC 20001
www.incits.org

Fortran-2024-00001-m232-draft-agenda.txt

INCITS/Fortran Meeting #232 Draft Agenda

February 26 - March 1, 2024, Berkeley, CA

Meeting #232 is a hybrid (mixed-mode) meeting:
in-person in Berkeley, CA with virtual option via Zoom

Teleconference details:
https://incits.zoom.us/j/82692064790?pwd=TFWubaF1GksYQlyo2br1GWJmYVJBEf.1
Meeting ID: 826 9206 4790
Passcode: Dg2zU5V=


I. Monday, February 26, 2024 -- 8:00AM - 5:00PM PT (UTC-7)
--------------------------------------------------------------
   1. Working Breakfast
      1. Visitor badge pick-up
   2. Opening Business - R. Budiardja (8:30AM)
      1. INCITS Code of Conduct
         http://www.incits.org/standards-information/policies
      2. INCITS Patent Policy and Antitrust
         http://www.incits.org/standards-information/legal-info
      3. Beginning membership report - L. Menard
         Reference document: 24-113
      4. Beginning Treasurer's report -  J. Steidel
         Reference document: 24-110
      5. Approval of draft agenda - R. Budiardja
         1. Reference document:  Fortran-2024-00001-m232-draft-agenda.txt
         Steve/Tom  UC
      6. Approval of Meeting 231 minutes - R. Budiardja
         1. Reference document:  PL22.3-2023-00094-m231-minutes.txt
         Jon/Steve

   3. National Items
      1. Liaison reports
         1. INCITS report (if any) - R. Budiardja
            1. INCITS now disallows joint meetings with NO exceptions.
               That's why we're configuring the WG5 meeting to be
               adjacent to the J3 meeting.
            2. Malcolm posted a new draft copy
            3. Work plan; please let Reuben know if you have any comments
               - Look at Germany proposal (24-102)
               - Any other ideas, please as paper this meeting
            4. Steve looking at a database or spreadsheet for interps
               on the J3 website

         2. MPI Liaison report (if any) - J. Hammond
            Reference documenet: 24-115
         3. OpenMP Liaison report (if any) - B. Long
            Reference document: 24-111
         4. flang Liaison report (if any) - M. LeAir
            Reference document: 24-112
         5. OpenACC Liaison report (if any) - J. Larkin
         6. fortran-lang/LFortran (if any) - O. Certik
   4. Berkeley Local Arrangements - K. Rasmussen
      Reference document: 24-100
      Damian is the actual local, Kate knows org of the meeting.
       Use the J3-Fortran slack channel to get invitation
       Thurs evening Bob Corbett will join the dinner crowd
   5. International Items - S. Lionel
      1. June 2024 WG5 Local Arrangements
          Will immediately follow J3 meeting, also in Berkeley
          The F2023 Standard has been published
          WG5 appreciates the 24-007 document for interps, markup.
          WG5 particularly appreciates Malcolm for making EOY deadline.
          Steve is working on getting ISO editor to approve our fonts
           and sizes, so by next standard should be easier to pass
           submission.
   6. Other Business - R. Budiardja
         Open-group discussion at each subgroup reports
      1. Comments from members
      2. Tutorials (if needed)
      3. Subgroup Organization
         Generic - Tom Clune
            Brad Richardson, Magne Haveraaen, Mark LeAir, Aury Shafer
         HPC - Bill Long
            Jon Steidel, Daniel Chen, Jeff Hammond, Soren Rasmussen,
            Raghu Maddhipatla
            No HPC papers yet - can work on approved work items
         JoR - Lorri
             Gary Klimowicz, Steve Lionel
         Data, Interp: No subgroup meetings

   7. Subgroup Meetings
   8. Working Lunch - Topic "Collaborating on HPC Bug Reports" (12:00PM)
   9. Subgroup Meetings
  10. Subgroup Reports (4:00PM)
        JoR - Review info papers 24-108, 24-109
        Generics
              for vote: 24-105r1, 24-106
        HPC
            Nothing for tomorrow

   Meeting recessed 4:15

II. Tuesday, February 27, 2024 -- 8:00AM - 5:00PM PT (UTC-7)
----------------------------------------------------------
   1. Working Breakfast
   2. Tutorials (8:30AM)
        Steve presented a Preprocessor tutorial
        In Tutorials as "Preprocessor Take 2.pptx"
   3. Plenary - subgroup heads
      Generics
--Discussion 24-105r1 "Requirements and specs for simplified template
                       procedures" [Shafran,Richardson](Clune/Richardson)

--Withdrawn 24-106 "Defining template procedures in host scope"
                    [Shafran,Richardson](Clune/K.Rasmussen)


   4. Subgroup Meetings
   5. Working Lunch -
      Topic "Parallel Runtime Interface for Fortran" (12:00PM)
   6. Subgroup Meetings
   7. Subgroup Reports (4:00pm)
      Generics
          For vote tomorrow 24-105r2.
          No further action on 24-106 this week.
      JOR - Nothing for tomorrow
      HPC - Nothing for tomorrow

   Recess: 4:15

III. Wednesday, February 28, 2024 -- 8:00AM - 5:00PM PT (UTC-7)
----------------------------------------------------------
   1. Working Breakfast
   2. Plenary - subgroup heads (8:30AM)
      Generics
**Motion 24-105r2 "Requirements and specs for simplified template
                   procedures" [Shafran,Richardson](Clune/Richardson)

      Straw Vote:                         OK    NotOK   Undecided
            Curly {}                      18    0        1
            angle-colon <: :>              7    8        3
            Double angle << >>             6    11       2
            Back tick `                    0    14       4
      As amended  UC


   3. Tutorials (if needed)
   4. Subgroup Meetings
   5. Working Lunch -
      Topic "A tour of Gary's Fortran github repository" (12:00PM)
   6. Subgroup Meetings
   7. Subgroup Reports (4:00pm)
      Generics 24-107r1 for info
      JoR    24-116, 14-117 for vote
      HPC   Nothing

Recess 4:15

IV. Thursday, February 29, 2024 -- 8:00AM - 5:00PM PT (UTC-7)
----------------------------------------------------------
   1. Working Breakfast
   2. Plenary - subgroup heads (8:30AM)

**Motion 24-116 "A modest proposal for adding an UNSIGNED type
                 to Fortran (DIN 6)"[Klimowicz,JoR] (Menard/Klimowicz)
    Vote is to support this proposal to WG5
        Roll call vote:  12 -Yes  1 - No  1 - Absent
            AMD               Yes
            ARM               Yes
            Dancing Bear Software  Yes
            HPE               No
            IBM Corporation   Yes
            Intel Corporation Yes
            Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
                              Yes
            Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
                              Not in attendance this meeting
            Lionel            Yes
            Los Alamos National Lab
                              Yes
            NASA              Yes
            National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR)
                              Yes
            NVidia Corporation Yes
            Oak Ridge National Labs
                              Yes

**Motion 24-117 "DIN02 Unions in interoperable derived types"
                [Lionel] (Menard/Lionel)
      Roll call vote: 10 yes 2 no 1 abstain 1 absent
            AMD               Yes
            ARM               Yes
            Dancing Bear Software  Yes
            HPE               No
            IBM Corporation   Yes
            Intel Corporation Yes
            Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
                              Yes
            Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
                              Not in attendance this meeting
            Lionel            Yes
            Los Alamos National Lab
                              Yes
            NASA              Yes
            National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR)
                              No
            NVidia Corporation Yes
            Oak Ridge National Labs
                              Abstain



   4. Closing Business
      1. Future meetings - R. Budiardja
           June will be in Berkeley  June 24-27, 28 WG5
               M-R is INCITS/Fortran
               F is WG5
            Kate will be sending out organizational email.
           October meeting:
              NASA DC didn't work
              Steve suggests a virtual meeting
              Straw Vote:
                     In person, West Coast       6
                     No preference              10
                     Strongly prefer virtual     2
              Tentative start date: week 4 in October
      2. Ending Treasurer's report -  J. Steidel
           No activity, so reference 24-110.txt
      3. Closing membership report - L. Menard
           13 of 14 members attended.
           No members in jeopardy.
           24 attendees plus 2 guests
           Reference: 24-113r1.txt for full totals.
   5. Comments from Members
   6. Adjournment
Adjourned 10:15PST
